Hello, hello, hello, and welcome
to English Learning for Curious
Minds, by Leonardo English, the show
where you can listen to fascinating
stories and learn weird and wonderful
things about the world at the same
time as improving your English.
I'm Alastair Budge, and today we are
going to be talking about something
you don’t normally find talked about
in an English class: eunuchs, men
who have had their testicles removed.
It might seem like an unusual topic,
but eunuchs have played a curious
and important role throughout
history, all over the world.
And today, we are going
to tell their story.
As a quick disclaimer, although
I will try to avoid particularly
graphic descriptions, there will be
some slightly intimate details in
this episode, so if you are feeling
particularly squeamish, or if you are
eating your breakfast right now, well,
please take this as a polite warning.
OK, with that out of the way, let’s get
right into it and talk about eunuchs.
When doing research for this
show, I often stumble across
unfortunate characters from history.
People who lived through tragic
circumstances, losing children,
parents, loved ones, overcoming
unbelievable hardship, or perhaps
not overcoming hardship at all,
and simply dying very young.
All the sort of stuff that makes
me feel very fortunate to have
been born when and where I was.
High on my list of unfortunate characters
is a young Roman boy known only as Sporus,
who you may remember from our mini-series
on Roman tyrants, in the episode on Nero.
Now, Nero, as you may already know,
and will certainly remember if you’ve
listened to the episode on him,
was a pretty nasty piece of work.
He ordered the deaths of his mother,
his stepbrother, and his first
wife, as well as countless other
people who got on his wrong side.
Some historians even suggest that he
killed his second wife, getting into a
fit of rage and kicking her in the stomach
while she was pregnant with his child.
In the interests of balance, others
say she might have died in childbirth.
Whatever the truth, she died, and
Nero went into a period of mourning.
But then, two years later, in
circumstances that are now forgotten
to history, he caught sight of a
young boy, a strikingly beautiful
young boy who he thought bore an
uncanny resemblance to his dead wife.
Nero being Nero, he didn’t just see
this boy and get a little bit sad
and emotional about his dead wife.
No, he ordered for the
boy to be brought to him.
And not only that, he ordered for the
boy to be castrated, his testicles cut
off, then dressed up in woman’s clothing.
He was given jewellery, attendants, and
told about his new role: Nero’s bride.
And later that year, he got married;
Nero, the Roman emperor, married the
now eunuch, Sporus, and the pair lived
together until Nero’s death a year later.
It would appear that Sporus didn’t
have much choice in the matter;
one day he was happily walking
along, minding his own business,
and the next he was being castrated
and married to the Roman emperor.
It's one of the most disturbing stories
of power, cruelty, and control in ancient
history, but it's also a good example of
something else — the idea that eunuchs
have, throughout history, often found
themselves in positions of surprising
influence, and proximity to power.
Now, Sporus’ story is clearly
extreme, but he was far from the
only eunuch in the ancient world.
For thousands of years, from China to
the Middle East, Rome to West Africa,
young boys and even adult men were
turned into eunuchs, and ended up
playing the role of trusted advisers,
military commanders, political fixers,
royal servants, and sometimes even the
most powerful people in entire empires.
Which raises the question: why?
Why did so many civilisations create
entire systems around castrated men?
Why did emperors often trust these
eunuchs more than ordinary men?
Why did they give them access to the
most private spaces in the palace?
And why were eunuchs, people who suffered
one of the most brutal procedures
imaginable, sometimes able to rise
to extraordinary heights of power?
On one level, the basic logic was the
same in every society where eunuchs
existed, and it’s not hard to see why.
A eunuch, because he could
not have children, was seen as
someone without personal ambition.
He could not start his own dynasty,
pass on wealth or titles, or
be tempted to seize the throne
for the benefit of future sons.
At the same time, because he was
castrated, he was also believed to
pose no sexual threat, which was
especially important in palaces
filled with wives, concubines,
and female relatives of the ruler.
In other words, he was a man who might
be completely loyal to the king, both
politically and personally, because
he could not have any descendants and
was thought to be sexually harmless.
In practice, this was a rather optimistic
view — eunuchs could be just as ambitious,
cunning, or politically skilled as anyone
else, and there are cases of eunuchs
being involved in sexual relationships
— still, the idea seemed to stick.
And if you are wondering how people
thousands of years ago with a very
rudimentary understanding of human
biology knew that castrating meant
that a man wouldn’t be able to have
children, well, this is thought to
have come from observing animals.
For thousands of years before the first
written records of eunuchs, humans
had already been castrating animals
such as cows, sheep, goats and pigs.
They noticed that whenever they did
this, the animals became calmer, easier
to control, and more predictable.
A castrated bull wouldn’t
try to dominate the herd.
A castrated ram, a male
sheep, wouldn’t fight.
People also noticed that castrated
animals didn’t try to mate; their interest
in reproduction all but disappeared.
Even if they did occasionally
mount other animals, it was pretty
half-hearted and never led to offspring.
So even before people knew how the
biology behind reproduction worked,
the pattern was obvious: remove the
testicles and the animal becomes
more obedient and, importantly,
infertile, unable to reproduce.
It didn’t take a huge leap of imagination
for early rulers to apply the same logic
to humans, thereby creating a class
of servants who, like those animals,
were seen as loyal, manageable, and
entirely dependent on their master.
And thus preferable to normal, uncastrated
men, men who wanted to have children,
who might be aggressive, and crucially,
were able to be sexually active.
So castration, in these early
societies, wasn’t just a punishment;
it was a political technology, a
way of creating a specific kind of
servant, one who was believed to be
safe, dependable, and controllable.
And we see this throughout
the ancient world.
The very first references to eunuchs
date back to over 4,000 years, to
ancient Mesopotamia, in modern-day Iraq.
There are mentions of royal attendants at
courts who appear to have been castrated,
although there is still a bit of debate
among historians about the details.
But by the time we reach the Assyrian
Empire, around the 9th century BC, the
idea of the eunuch is unmistakable.
In carvings and palace reliefs, we see
powerful-looking officials — sometimes
holding weapons, sometimes carrying
messages, sometimes guarding the
king — described in inscriptions
using words that suggest castration.
And it spread.
Across the ancient world, from Mesopotamia
to Persia, from Greece to Egypt, we
see variations of the same logic:
eunuchs serving as guardians, diplomats,
scribes, treasurers, commanders, and
private attendants to kings and queens.
But it was in one civilisation above all
others that the eunuch system reached
its most elaborate, most organised,
and arguably most powerful form.
Imperial China.
If you imagine all the well-known court
eunuchs of world history — the ones who
ruled behind the throne, advised emperors,
led military expeditions, or controlled
entire bureaucracies — the majority of
the most famous examples come from China.
And this is reflective of quite how
important eunuchs were in Imperial China.
For over 2,000 years, from the Qin dynasty
in the 3rd century BC right through until
the fall of the Qing dynasty in 1912,
barely more than 100 years ago, Chinese
emperors relied heavily on eunuchs.
And to give you an idea of quite
how widespread this practice was,
it’s estimated that at the end
of the Ming dynasty, in the 17th
century, there were somewhere in the
region of 100,000 eunuchs in China.
Most were deployed across the empire as
loyal administrators: tax collectors,
industry supervisors, and so on.
Essentially keeping an eye on the
sprawling empire and being tasked with
reporting back to the Imperial palace.
But a small percentage of these
eunuchs had a more important role:
working inside the Forbidden City,
controlling access to the emperor,
and managing the imperial household.
If you have ever been to Beijing,
you will know that the Forbidden
City is a vast complex: 980
buildings and almost 10,000 rooms.
It can broadly be split into two sections:
the inner court, and the outer court.
And apart from the emperor,
the eunuchs were the only males
allowed into the inner court.
There were a few exceptions, like
young imperial princes or official
visitors, but these would be highly
regulated, by the eunuchs of course.
The logic behind allowing eunuchs,
and nobody else, was the same as in
other societies that used eunuchs:
because they were castrated, they
posed no sexual threat and would have
no sexual desire, so the emperor’s
wife and concubines were not at risk.
Now, most eunuchs entered the
palace as young boys or teenagers.
Some were sold by desperate families,
some were taken as punishment or
tribute, and a small number chose
castration voluntarily, usually
because life inside the palace offered
more stability than life outside it.
Once inside, their lives
were tightly regulated.
They were given small rooms, strict
timetables, and assigned to departments
that handled everything from cooking the
emperor’s meals to managing his clothing,
cleaning his chambers, guarding the
gates, or organising imperial ceremonies.
They were household servants, essentially.
At the lowest levels, the work was
exhausting and often humiliating.
These eunuchs would spend long
days sweeping corridors, carrying
firewood, or running errands
across the vast palace grounds.
They were not allowed to
leave without permission.
They could be beaten for mistakes.
Their entire lives were at
the mercy of their superiors.
But every eunuch knew that the
palace was also a place where
fortunes could change quickly.
A kind word from a senior eunuch, a
small act of loyalty noticed by the
emperor, a minor promotion — any of these
could open the door to a better life.
And at the very top of the eunuch
hierarchy were positions of immense power.
The Chief Eunuch, sometimes called
Director of Ceremonial or the Supervisor
of the Inner Court, he controlled
access to the emperor — and this
made him one of the most influential
people in the entire empire.
If a minister wanted to speak
to the emperor, he needed
the eunuch’s permission.
If a message needed to reach the
throne, it passed through eunuch hands.
Even the empress and imperial
concubines, who lived in the
inner palace, they depended on
eunuchs for daily communication.
This created a curious political
reality: although eunuchs could
not hold official government posts,
they often knew more about what was
happening in the palace than the
highest-ranking ministers outside it.
They saw the emperor every day.
They heard his complaints.
They knew which advisers he
trusted and which he disliked.
They would even witness private
arguments within the imperial family.
That kind of access translated into power,
real power, and it didn’t go unnoticed.
Eunuchs became the subject of deep
resentment, especially from the
Confucian scholars: the highly
educated men who ran the civil service.
These were men who had spent
years mastering classical texts,
passing brutal exams, and preparing
themselves for government.
They believed that they should be
the emperor’s closest advisers, and
guardians of virtue and good governance.
Not the eunuchs, palace servants whose
only qualification seemed to be the
removal of a bit of their anatomy.
But you can probably understand
why emperors so often preferred
the company of the eunuchs.
Scholars could be opinionated,
moralising, and, from an emperor’s
point of view, irritatingly willing
to tell him what he should do.
Eunuchs, by contrast, lived in
the imperial palace, spent their
entire lives serving the emperor,
and often knew him from childhood.
They were not part of elite families,
they had no sons to advance, and they
owed their entire identity to the court.
They were far more likely to go
along with whatever the emperor said.
And who doesn’t like being
told that they are right?
And for certain eunuchs who built
close relationships with the emperor,
they could be richly rewarded.
Some eunuchs became fabulously wealthy.
Some commanded armies.
Some toppled governments.
And one of them — perhaps the most famous
eunuch in all of Chinese history, Zheng He
— would go on to command one of the greatest
naval fleets that the world has ever seen.
Perhaps you don’t immediately
associate being a eunuch with being
a heroic military commander, but
China’s greatest naval commander
was made a eunuch as a young boy.
Now, China might have produced some of
the most famous eunuchs in history, but
it was far from the only place where
castrated men played important roles.
For almost 500 years, the Ottoman Empire
made heavy use of eunuchs to supervise
the sultan’s harem — his mother,
wives, daughters and their servants.
Like in China, some of these
eunuchs became fabulously wealthy,
and like in China, their influence
depended entirely on the ruler.
A strong sultan might keep eunuchs
firmly in their place; a weak one
might rely on them so heavily that
they effectively ran the palace.
It was a similar story in Byzantium, as
well as in various Islamic caliphates
and west African tribal societies.
India is another story, with eunuchs
being classified as “third gender”,
neither male nor female, which brings
us into an entirely different topic
that we aren’t going to cover today.
And there was, of course, the different
but still worth mentioning tradition of
the castrati, the young boys who would
be castrated before puberty in order to
preserve their high-pitched singing voice.
So, to wrap things up, eunuchs are
not a quirk of Chinese history, nor a
footnote in the story of Nero’s Rome.
They are part of a much broader
pattern — one that appears in empires
separated by thousands of kilometres
and with completely different
cultural or religious traditions.
Whenever societies had strongly
gender-segregated spaces, concerns about
dynastic stability, rulers who feared
rivals, or political systems built on
personal loyalty rather than institutions,
they often turned to eunuchs.
The extraordinary thing, perhaps,
is not that eunuchs existed, but
that they existed almost everywhere
for more than three thousand years.
And not to get too much into the
gory details, but the process
of becoming a eunuch, of being
castrated, was horrendous.
It was incredibly painful, mortality
rates were very high, often due to
infection or massive blood loss after
the procedure, and even if a boy was
lucky enough to survive the operation,
he could look forward to a series
of long-term health complications.
And that's before we talk about
any of the emotional or social
challenges that would come from it.
Clearly, it was a horrendous practice.
And fortunately, by the start of
the 20th century, the practice
had practically died out.
It was officially banned in 1924 in
China, and the era of the eunuch was over.
By the 1950s and 60s, only a
handful of eunuchs remained.
What is remarkable — and historically
invaluable — is that several of
these last eunuchs lived long enough
to be interviewed by journalists,
historians, and documentary filmmakers.
One of the most famous was a
man called Sun Yaoting, a man
dubbed “China’s last eunuch.”
He was born in 1902, and castrated as a
teenager in the hope of gaining a palace
position, but by the time he finished
healing the empire had already collapsed.
He eventually found work inside the
Forbidden City, serving the old imperial
household, and later worked as a caretaker
after the palace became a museum.
In later interviews, he described the
daily life of eunuchs — the strictness,
the hierarchy, the loneliness, the moments
of unexpected pride, and the deep sense of
identity that came from serving the court.
He also spoke candidly about the pain of
his castration, the lost opportunities,
and the strange feeling of belonging
to a world that no longer existed.
It’s kind of mad to think.
For thousands of years, all over the
world, this, I think we can safely say,
barbaric practice was a fundamental
part of many countries’ administration.
Eunuchs were everywhere.
Then, almost in the blink
of an eye, they disappeared.
All that remains are fragments,
stories, records, and the voices of a
few men who bore the cruel marks of an
old system, and lived long enough to
describe a world that no longer exists.
OK, then, that is it for
today's episode on eunuchs.
I hope it's been an interesting one,
and that you've learnt something new.
And something you can’t say everyday is
that you’ve both learned about eunuchs
and learned English at the same time.
You've been listening to English Learning
for Curious Minds by Leonardo English.
I'm Alastair Budge, you stay safe, and
I'll catch you in the next episode.